at the beginning of the California Gold
Rush a group of people tried to cross a
huge deserted Valley in search of quick
fortunes they knew it was dangerous but
packed their bags and fearlessly headed
for the gold fields through the
sweltering heat however they got lost
and couldn't find a way out for several
days
luckily the company was rescued and as
they climbed out of the valley
one of the men looked back and said
goodbye Death Valley and this name stuck
the valley is located in the northern
Mojave Desert on the borders of
California and Nevada about two hours
drive from Las Vegas it covers 3,000
square miles which is five times the
size of London it's the lowest the
hottest and the driest place in North
America in 1913 the United States
weather bureau recorded a temperature of
134 degrees Fahrenheit at furnace creek
in the valley this was a record but even
in ordinary times the temperature
reaches 120 degrees during a summers day
why is this place so hot well first of
all the Sun heats the land to incredible
temperatures this happens because the
sky above the desert is usually clear
and the land is a dark color which
absorbs more heat
another reason is the superheated air
flow which moves through the desert warm
air rises and cools but here it's
trapped by the surrounding mountain
ranges so it always ends up back on the
valley floor it gets warmed up there
again because of the high atmospheric
pressure the valley is one of the driest
places in the Western Hemisphere rain
might not fall for several years in a
row here but when it does rain the
valley looks truly spectacular
afterwards if you're lucky enough to
visit this place in spring you may see
beautiful wildflowers bloom throughout
the area the valley sits in the rain
shadow which means that the mountains
surrounding the desert block out wind
and moist air what if we just flooded it
the idea seems reasonable at first the
water could reduce the temperature in
the region and attract tourists
to imagine a big clean lake and
comfortable hotels instead of this
lifeless landscape but it's not that
simple despite its name the valley is
full of life it has over 100 species of
plants which is why it has gained the
status of a national park around 440
species have adapted to life in its
harsh climate the desert bighorn sheep
are among the animals that live there
ridges and canyons aren't a problem for
hoofed animals like this they can easily
move through the desert terrain the
biggest predator in the valley is the
coyote it can survive in various
different environments and lives
wherever it can find food coyotes that
live in desert regions can withstand
heat thanks to their lighter coats but
the most unusual animal here is a
scorpion that glows in the dark this is
caused by chemicals in its shell that
appear fluorescent under ultraviolet
light these scorpions are not easily
found though because they're very small
and live underground here in Death
Valley even stones live their own unique
life no seriously they actually move by
themselves there are lots of theories
about these Sailing rocks strange things
happen in a place called racetrack playa
this is a dry lake in the valley with a
perfectly smooth surface stones move
along the bottom of the lake at a speed
up to 16 feet per minute they can travel
in different directions for up to 330
feet turn right and left and even go
back to their starting positions for a
long time nobody was able to catch the
rocks actually moving but people studied
the racetrack imprints left on the
ground in 2014 the mystery was solved
time-lapse video footage showed that the
rocks move because of the perfect
balance of water wind and thin sheets of
ice that form at night this floating ice
carried away by the wind drags the rocks
across the slippery surface
this is the deserted bottom of Death
Valley called badwater basin
it's 280 feet below sea level which is
almost the height of the Statue of
Liberty this place holds the title of
the lowest point in North America
there's an even lower point near this
pool but it's unreachable by foot the
mud there is covered with only a thin
crust of white salt so it's dangerous to
walk on it for this reason it was
decided to make the pool in Badwater
Basin officially the lowest point it's
dead interestingly the tallest mountain
in the continental United States Mount
Whitney is only about 80 miles from the
lowest point it has an elevation of
14,500 feet now Badwater Basin isn't as
dry as it seems in some places water
comes to the surface from a huge
underground reservoir no matter how high
the temperatures are the springs never
dry up but the quality of water matches
the basins name when it reaches the
surface it becomes 2 times saltier than
ocean water so it definitely can't
quench your thirst you can see salt
crystals in the dry places which form
when the rainwater that accumulates on
the surface evaporates now the last
thing you'd probably want to do in a
place like this is go for a run but some
people seem to disagree
the Badwater ultramarathon known as the
world's toughest footrace takes place
here the finish line of the 135 mile
race is located on the slope of Mount
Whitney to get there runners need to
overcome three mountain ranges with
13,000 feet of elevation shoes literally
melt in the sweltering heat very few
participants even among experienced
athletes are capable of doing this race
to the end an extravagant spanish-style
castle in the heart of the desert now
this isn't a mirage though it may look
like one Scotty's castle is one of the
main attractions of Death Valley it's
also the scene of an exciting story from
the times of the
Wild West the stories heroes our Walter
Scott a performer cowboy gold digger and
adventurer
all rolled into one and a gullible
millionaire named Albert Johnson Walter
Scott convinced the businessman to
invest in his gold mine in the valley
area Albert Johnson and his wife
traveled to the region and then decided
to build a house there for their
vacations he spent as much as two
million dollars on a useless building in
the middle of the desert the chic palace
has many different rooms including
several kitchens and bathtubs though
Walter Scott couldn't find a single lump
of precious metal there he told everyone
that the castle was built with money
from big gold mines in the area he
became famous throughout the West as the
king of the gold mine in the desert the
place is known as Scotty's castle to
this day though he never owned the
mansion or the land on which it was
built
gold seekers didn't find much valuable
metal in the valley back then but that
doesn't mean this land isn't rich in the
1880s people discovered borax there I
know it's not as romantic as gold or
silver but this mineral is also very
valuable borax has been used to make
laundry detergents and today it's used
in the manufacture of fiberglass and
many high-tech products it's also used
in hybrid fuels and experimental fuel
cells and that's the facts about borax